hey everybody it's jay here from e2
language how
are you i hope you're going well i
haven't seen you in quite a long time
i've been busy doing other stuff
what we're going to do in this lesson is
we're going to do like an ielts
speaking mock test and i'm going to be
your examiner so i'll be asking you
specific questions we're going to do
speaking part one
which is pretty much just small talk
okay i'm going to ask you some
relatively straightforward simple
questions
and you'll give me a nice reply for each
of them that's easy
speaking part two is after that that's
where you have to
prepare on a certain topic for one
minute and then speak for
up to two minutes on that topic trying
not to go round and round in
circles trying to trying to speak
coherently in a nice structured way
exercising grammatical range grammatical
accuracy
focusing on your pronunciation and your
fluency as well
then we're going to get stuck into
speaking part three which is where we
get a little bit more
philosophical that is the questions will
be a little bit more
abstract and as such they will require
you to
exercise a bit more of your let's say
you're
nuanced vocabulary some of that less
frequent less common vocabulary you have
to think quite
deeply when you're answering those
questions in order to maximize your
score
cool anyway i'll give you some tips and
pointers as we go through but this will
be great
practice for you okay so let's start
with
speaking part one let's talk about
sport did you play sport when you were
young
feel free by the way to pause the video
if you require
further time 10 seconds is probably a
bit
short but you should be speaking for at
least
10 seconds on each of these please do
not give
one or two word answers here try to
exercise your vocabulary and grammar
right from the outset do you play sport
now
what sports are most popular in your
country
how important is sport for young people
okay how did you go doing that now i'm
going to
attempt these myself so let me answer my
own questions here so
let's talk about sport did you play
sport when you were young
when i was young i used to play a lot of
different sports
the primary sport i played was cricket
growing up
i used to be an opening batsman and i
used to also open the bowling as well
but i grew up in the countryside so
there weren't many sports to choose from
okay first of all i just lied completely
i did not open the batting or bowling or
whatever i said i did play cricket
again it doesn't matter one of the key
things here is
don't let the truth get in the way of a
good answer
a good ielts answer that is just say
whatever comes into your mind okay just
let it be unfiltered and spontaneous
because you're not scored on the content
per se you're scored on the vocabulary
the grammar
and the structure okay let's do number
two let's see what sort of porkies i can
come up with
do you play sport now up until very
recently i played sport but
due to coronavirus i had to stop playing
sport the sport i did play was actually
touch football cool that'll do
that was about 10 seconds that's good
enough next one
what sports are most popular in your
country
well i live in a city called melbourne
australia and we have our own brand of
football called
aussie rules or afl so we play that in
winter
and in summer the most popular sport is
cricket
cool nice and coherent pretty
straightforward i just named the two
most popular sports here
with a little bit of a story about the
city that i live in
last question how important is sport for
young people
i think sport for young people is
essential in fact i think
sports should be made mandatory in all
primary schools and secondary schools
because it teaches people how to be fit
and how to maintain
good healthy exercise habits something
like that
nice exercise habits there's good use of
collocations there
good straightforward sentence structure
cool
let's have a look at speaking part two
okay speaking part two this is where it
starts to get a lot
more tricky a lot trickier so
if you need help with your ielts by the
way check out e2language.com you can
sign up for free and get
loads of free stuff including some free
live classes free material free
methodology lessons etc
and if you really want some help with
ielts you can go across to that website
and
upgrade your account to an express or an
express plus package
which will include a mock test loads of
material
lots of stuff that is not on youtube for
example
you can upgrade further for tutorials
writing feedback
speaking mock tests the whole lot
okay so this is it so on test day what's
going to happen is the examiner will
hand you a piece of paper the piece of
paper will have something like this on
it a
topic it might say something like
describe a time when the weather
prevented you from doing something
you should say what your plan was what
whether you were hoping for what
happened and explain how you felt when
you had to change your plans
you'll have one minute to prepare to
speak for
up to two minutes this is going to be
pretty tricky
what you might want to do is make sure
you have a long introduction
you can really elaborate on each of
those dot points and again
don't let the truth get in the way of a
good ielts answer
the other thing you can do is feel free
to split this into two stories or even
three stories you might want to tell a
story that happened in the past and one
that happens more recently for example
let's see how you go i'll give you one
minute to prep and then two minutes to
speak
how did you go doing that that's pretty
tough
isn't it especially if you're just
telling the one story because
to tell the one story and to maintain
speech for two minutes requires you to
elaborate in
in really interesting ways
one of the things that you will need to
try to avoid when you're telling this
story or speaking for two minutes is
going round and round in circles telling
saying the same thing again and again i
wonder if that's something that you did
all right i'm going to do the same thing
when i
did the one minute preparation time i
noted down sort of three stories
okay you are not penalized for telling
three stories although the topic cue
card says
to um say something about a an event or
a thing one thing if you do in fact talk
about two or three things that is
completely fine
the cue card there is just to guide you
again there's nothing in the criteria
in the scoring that marks you against
that however you do need to actually
speak on topic
all right let me tell my story for two
minutes see how i go
okay let me bring this up
okay so i'm going to tell you about a
few different times
where weather has actually prevented me
from doing something that i was planning
on doing
so firstly the first story that comes to
mind
is from a place called jogjakarta in
java in indonesia where i lived when i
was about
22 years old and this particular place
is prone to very wild weather
it has a dry season and a wet season and
in the wet season when it rains it rains
like you've never seen
rain before i believe it's a type of
tropical rain
and it would happen at a particular time
each day
and so what would happen is i would be
riding my scooter to university for
example and it would begin to rain and i
would have to stop and basically hide in
a shop with other people who are doing
the same thing
because it would just begin to pour so i
was on my way to university
of course i was hoping for weather that
would be clear and nice and sunny so i
could ride to university and not get wet
but that's what happened and of course
when that happened
you would sort of get used to it so it
wasn't disappointing or it wasn't a
shock it was just something you became
accustomed to
a second event that happened that is
similar is when i was at a festival
and it was actually just too hot to do
anything so although there were bands
playing and there were events happening
etc
i believe the temperature reached
something like 43 degrees
this is in a part of central australia
and as such you were rendered completely
useless because it was simply too hot
you would have to stay in the single
spot just to keep cool enough
so that you didn't overheat or let's see
nothing would happen to you medically
so that was another type of event like
this
oh my god was that all right that was
all right i suppose not great
cool so what did we learn there well i
learned that
sometimes you say stupid things in ielts
speaking part two but that's just the
nature of the beast
um if you do say something that's a
little bit silly what did i say
i said people overheat do people
overheat they're not like car radiators
are they
anyway that's going to happen so what
else well i basically switched from one
story to the next i tell i told quite an
elaborate story about the rain in jog
jakarta
then i switched to another event
entirely because
quite simply i was out of ideas about
that single event in
jakarta and the rain so i switched to
another event where it was too hot so i
moved
basically from one topic to the next
still within the topic of weather but i
talked about
rain and then i talked about heat okay
now you can do that or you can think
about splitting your story into past
present future
tell a story about a weather event in
the past one that's more recent one
that's possibly in the future
think about breaking your stories up
like that that's helpful
okay and it enables you to
[Music]
elaborate and to use language that is
particular for that topic right i think
i said some good sorts of phrases and
collocations etc
and i wasn't well hopefully i wasn't
waffling too much
cool all right let's move on to speaking
part three
all right again if you need help
particularly with ielts speaking part 2
or you want to do a speaking mock test
check out e2language.com okay
speaking part 3. here we go it's going
to get a little
little bit philosophical now so let's
talk about the weather in what way do
people discuss the weather
in your country
you don't need to speak for 30 seconds
by the way this is a
a good indication of how long you should
speak for on these particular questions
but if you hit 20 seconds or so i think
that is also fine
what type of weather do people prefer in
your country
a weather forecast accurate in your
country
are there any dangerous weather events
in your country
okay now let me answer my own questions
and i'll give you a bit of an example of
how i would do this
so in what ways do people discuss
weather
in your country i would answer it like
this i would say
in australia talking about the weather
is a very common form of small talk
so it's very common that when you bump
into somebody in a shop for example and
you don't know the person
particularly well the way that you would
break the ice is to say something like
wow it's really rainy today or
jeez the weather's nice today or
something like that some people don't
really like talking about the weather in
fact i know of a particular company
where they've banned the use of talking
about the weather in their company
that's actually true by the way but
anyway that was just an interesting
little bit that i'd put on the end there
but i did get to exercise some
vocabulary around small talk
i've forgotten what i said but hopefully
that was okay next question
what type of weather do people prefer in
your country so let me just sort of
think through this aloud what would i
talk about here like immediately i think
okay
people dislike winter here what i would
also say is australia is a very big
country so the weather patterns are
completely different in the north to the
south to the east the west et cetera
so i might start with that and then i'd
talk about people
basically liking summer spring and
autumn disliking winter so
my answer would be something like this i
would say well it's hard to generalize
to the entire country of australia
because it's such a large country
but certainly where i live people
dislike winter winters are very long
and cold and sort of grim and after too
much grey sky people really crave
sunshine
so i would say that people particularly
like summer it's a very active time of
year but also spring and autumn are
beautiful too
cool all right i'm going to talk through
number three
weather forecasts accurate in your
country cool so i'll do the same thing
i'm going to
not generalize bring it closer to my my
city i'm going to talk about whether
fluctuations changing whether it's very
difficult to predict
something like that so let's see what
pops out
i would say again australia is a very
big country so you can't really
generalize for the whole of the country
i certainly know in the north of
australia
the weather is far more predictable it
really does follow a sort of
wet season dry season type of pattern
in the south of australia where i live
the weather is very unpredictable
a lot of the weather comes in from
different wind directions for example so
it might be
sunny one day and rainy the next and
often the forecasts are simply wrong
that'll do whatever next one are there
any dangerous weather events in your
country
okay so first thing that comes to mind
in australia of course is bushfires
um so i'd talk about that then the next
sort of idea that pops into my mind is
something about climate change and maybe
i could make a sort of
statement about hope that hopefully
weather patterns will
become uh what's the word um
less less crazy oh let's see what sort
of language i can come up with here
so i'd say something like while
we're lucky in australia we don't really
have hurricanes or
floods so much one of the things that we
need to be really careful of in
australia is
bushfires and that certainly happens in
my state in victoria in australia
and i think with climate change
happening i think these weather events
are going to become more frequent so
hopefully
hopefully we can do something to make
them less frequent
ta-da the end cool so that
would give you a bit of an example of
how ielts
speaking is done so you start with part
one with those small talk questions we
need to sort of elaborate talk for about
sort of
probably 10 to 15 seconds you know get
some good
language out don't just answer with one
or two words
part two you had an experience of how
difficult it can be to be honest to be
to speak for up to two minutes on a
single topic
without just going round and round in
circles and as i mentioned
i recommend splitting it into several
stories past present future
or several different topics based within
the main topic so if it's weather
you might talk about heat rain whatever
something like that
okay that will help you out then finally
in part three we looked at some more
abstract
questions that really make you think and
make you respond with
with far more sophisticated language use
where you really do need to exercise
more complex sentence structures better
vocabulary etc
and all the while we're thinking about
fluency so we're not
hesitating too much we're not saying arm
and are too much
we're thinking about vocabulary we think
about vocabulary in two ways we're
thinking about it in terms
of precision that is we're using the
right word at the right time
we're also thinking about vocabulary in
terms of range that is we're not just
repeating the same word again and again
i think before i said the word common
and common twice
you know common frequent infrequent you
want to mix up your synonyms
grammatical accuracy means that my verb
tenses my prepositions my plural nouns
are all
accurate but also grammatical range
in that my sentence structures vary if i
can
okay i don't want to just answer in
short simple sentences
i want to create a range of different
sentence types these should
come naturally to you it's the grammar
that follows the meaning or the idea so
it's idea first
and then we're putting it into language
to put it out there right
by the way i should mention at this
point if you require help on any of your
fundamental skills that is vocab
pronunciation by the way pronunciation's
the other one
pronunciation or grammar check out
e2school.com
you can sign up for some free courses
there to help you with grammar vocab
and pronunciation which are the three
pillars the three ingredients of
language and certainly all languages and
particularly no not particularly
english as well cool that's all from me
nice to see you again i hope that was
some semblance of
fun i hope you're staying safe remember
to check out e2language.com
for your ielts test see you soon